---
title: "Team Colors 2.1"
date: 2015-08-01
tags: design-process
---

[Team Colors 2.0](http://jim-nielsen.com/blog/2015/team-colors-2-0/) was an enhancement in the design UX of the site. Team Colors 2.1 was, primarily, an enhancement in what i'll call the the developer UX of the site. While 2.0 made it easier to find and browse logos, 2.1 made it easier to develop and work on the site.

2.1 was not, however, primarily an ehancement on the development side of the site. What spurred all these big changes was not only a modernization of the development process, but an effort to add new color modes for teams and cite their source where avaialble.

So, the three primary goals of 2.1 were as follows:

- Implement a task runner
- Switch over to a templating language
- Add and document official team colors

## Implementing a task runner

Implement a task runner (get linting for js and data files)
 Tried Grunt
        - Tried Gulp


## Switching to a Templating Language

In 2.0, the development was all handled using PHP. Because there were so many teams, I didn’t want to type out all the static HTML. So I used PHP which allowed me to write one template then loop over a giant JSON data file that contained all the different leagues, teams, and colors.

So I had a `index.php` file that served as my template. It looked something like:

    <?php
        $data = file('/path/to/data.json');
        foreach ($team as $data) { ?>
            <li>
                <h2><?= $team['name'] ?></h2>
                <ul>
                    <?php
                        foreach($team['colors'] as $color){ ?>
                            <li><?= $color ?></li>
                    <?php } ?>
                </ul>
            </li>
        <?php
    ?>

Then I had a utility script I ran from the terminal that basically excecuted my `index.php` file and render it, as a server would, to an `index.html` file that, following the template above, ended up looking something like:

    <li>
        <h2>Utah Jazz</h2>
        <ul>
            <li>#435240</li>
            <li>#1938BC</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
        <h2>Washington Wizards</h2>
        <ul>
            <li>#ABC123</li>
            <li>#DEF456</li>
        </ul>
    </li>

And on and on for many more lines. This worked great, for the most part. The only thing was remembering to run the script (and sometimes getting mixed up on localhost—depending on what I was wanting to look at, I had to make sure I was at localhost/index.php or localhost/index.html).

But, with the addition of a task runner, I wanted to swtich over to a proper templating language and make outputting the `index.html` file part of the build process.






## Separating Design Assets into Individual Files

More official colors (HEX, RGB, CMYK, PMS) talk about how did this ... rgb hex conversion, noralize json, etc
Separate design assets into individual files



Results:

## colors and ata
Rather than one big .json file with every league and every team, each league now has its own corresponding .json file with each team's data in it. So in `src/data` I have `nba.json`, `mlb.json`, `nfl.json`, etc. with each file having an array of objects, each object corresponding to a team.

